(waves crashing)
The government has called out
the National Reserves as civil unrest
grips the nation this evening.
41 people have been
arrested island-wide today
in the worst case of civil unrest
to rock Jamaica in many years.
(gun shots)
(people yelling)
(helicopter flying)
Food and
major commodities run low
as Jamaicans remain locked inside.
Several persons have been
shot and injured or killed.
Shortly after
3:00, a single bullet
pierced the chest of the
25-year-old expectant mother
as she stood at the intersection
of Grand Spin and Shorted roads.
Her family was tugging
at her lifeless body.
Hospitals, airlines and vendors
hurting from the wound of violent protest.
A team from the IMF, which
is currently in Jamaica,
is wrapping up a four day visit
for a technical assessment
of the country's financial situation.
The issue is to make globalization work
for the benefit of all.
There will not be a
good future for the rich
if there is no prospect for
a better future for the poor.
Stay tuned, the details on these
and other stories after the break.
(upbeat rock music)
Baskin Robbins,
where the world goes for ice cream.
♪ Rich man's world is in the city ♪
♪ Oh ♪
♪ Destruction of the poor is our poverty ♪
♪ Lord, destruction of ♪
our soul is vanity ♪ ♪
♪ Where do we wait ♪
♪ (sings in foreign language) ♪
♪ Whooaaa ♪
♪ I and I, we want to rule our destiny ♪
♪ Oh yeah, I and I ♪
♪ (sings in foreign language) ♪
♪ Our destiny ♪
(helicopter flying)
So the system set it up.
Mm-hmm.
For them to have you
fighting against yourself,
them get out of trouble,
fight them so you unite within yourself.
(speaking in foreign language)
But when them can't get you
struggling among yourself,
them hold is tighter.
And that is all them saided.
If thou lend money to any of my people
that is poor by thee,
thou shall not be to Him as a usurer,
neither shall thou lay upon Him usury.
If thou at all take thy
neighbor's raiment to pledge,
thou shalt deliver it unto Him
by that the sun goeth down.
(upbeat island music)
(airplane rushing by)
♪ Seven richest countries in the world ♪
♪ All of them have a little meeting ♪
♪ And them a plan to keep ♪
and oppress the poor ♪
♪ So them have a little meeting ♪
We would like to take this opportunity
to expand a very warm welcome
to our visitors to our beautiful island.
We do hope you'll enjoy your stay here.
♪ These countries want to stay on top ♪
♪ So they'll find any way ♪
♪ To them third world people life ♪
♪ Is but a small price to be paid ♪
If you come
to Jamaica as a tourist
this is what you will see.
If you come by airplane
you will certainly land in Montego Bay.
And certainly not in Kingston.
♪ Welcome to Jamaica ♪
♪ What's old is what's new ♪
♪ We're glad that you joined us ♪
♪ We've been waiting for you ♪
♪ Welcome to Jamaica ♪
♪ You're new island home ♪
♪ Please see this as home ♪
♪ We're proud of Jamaica ♪
You're thinking of the hard, and cold,
and long days you spent working.
Earning money so that you
could stay in this place.
Jamaica.
Where the sun must always shine.
Where the climate is
deliciously hot and dry.
At least for the four to
ten days you will stay here.
You are indifferent to the fact
that you can enter this country
simply by showing your driver's license.
You are indifferent to this fact
because you can travel anywhere.
(airplane soaring by)
The thought that a citizen of Jamaica
would have to give an exhaustive account
of how and why they have lived
to visit your native country,
has never crossed your mind.
Since you're a tourist,
you do not travel with
stacks of cardboard boxes
containing much needed cheap
clothes and food for relatives.
What do you have in your bags?
That has nothing to do
with counting the men here.
You move
through customs swiftly.
You move through customs with ease.
Your bags are not searched.
On your way out of the airport,
you stop to make an exchange of money.
Can I get 250?
Thank you.
20 please.
How are you?
You are
excited by the large sheaf
of Jamaican dollars you get in
exchange for your 20 dollars.
You're gonna get 1850.
1850, I feel rich right now.
How much does it cost
for a shirt down here?
An average.
How much does it cost
for a t-shirt down here?
You have
not yet been to a shop
to see how little your large
sheaf of money can buy.
It would not to occur
to you that the weakness
of your newly traded money is
a result of many devaluations
imposed by the
International Monetary Fund.
The International
Monetary Fund, the IMF,
is urging Jamaica to reverse
the declining fiscal deficit
as a catalyst for economic growth.
To understand the
International Monetary Fund,
it is best to go back to history.
We come to 1944.
The war is coming near to an end.
The allies were determined
not to have the war finish,
and end up in the mess of the 1930's.
At Bretton
Woods, New Hampshire,
delegates from 44 allied
and associate countries
arrive for the opening of the
United Nations Monetary
and Financial Conference.
The key institution set up was
the International Monetary Fund.
And the purpose of the
fund was to have a bank
they could turn to for
short term borrowing.
To serve the short term creating interest
of the winners of the war.
United States
Treasury Secretary Morgenthau
heads the American delegation.
To be discussed are plans
for the stabilization of world currencies.
Same time they set up the World Bank
to provide capital for
the rebuilding of Europe.
You have to remember what we
now know as the third world,
didn't exist.
There were a few major powers.
Each of which had a large empire.
We had no voice, we had no presidency,
just were part of somebody
else's power structure.
You ask who's interest.
I ask the question who set it up.
(upbeat island music)
Alright ladies and gentleman.
Once again, pleasant evening,
and welcome to my island home, Jamaica.
Now you'll realize that we drive
on the left hand side of the road.
Might seem wrong.
But the right side is suicide.
Alright?
So set back, relax, and you enjoy.
Feel free to ask any questions.
I am Carrie and this is
your driver, Phillip.
Coming up on the left hand side
we have Sandals Royal Jamaica.
Right here we have the
Butch Stewart Resort.
You're driving on a road
and it is called The Queen's Highway.
When it was built we were ruled over
by something called a queen.
We do not have a queen anymore.
We have a very old McDonald's.
Baskin Robbins, right on left hand,
right hand side, I beg your pardon.
So hey, we have it all,
so all tourists if you even
want to go for ice cream.
There is it, see, McDonald's.
(laughing)
When we wished for
independence from Great Britain,
we had something else in mind.
We can not now remember what that was.
So, you could imagine how I felt
when one day driving
on The Queen's Highway
I asked myself
is the Jamaica that I
see before me self-ruled,
a worse off place than it was
when dominated by the bad minded English?
My government in the United Kingdom
has laid down it's responsibilities
and has seized to have any
authority in and over Jamaica,
after more than 300 years.
♪ One love ♪
♪ One heart ♪
♪ Let's join together and ♪
Countries like Jamaica found that
when they became free
they soon were in every
kind of financial problem.
Because they didn't have
the economic strength to,
shall we say, make it on their own.
They needed time to build economies
that could then make it in the world.
When you see what all the
food from abroad cost,
you realize that the food production
to feed ourselves in Jamaica,
is not only a matter
of opportunity for you,
it's a matter of survival for the nation.
Comes 1973.
There is a world convulsion
caused by the oil price increases.
All of a sudden we're
having to find sums of money
we never dreamed of before,
just to make ends meet.
Now what can you do?
First of all you go to the
private banking system.
And you see well can I get
a private banking loan.
Because I'm strapped for
cash, I need some support,
and I having trouble
paying my over seas bills.
When the private
banks won't lend to you,
then you've go to do something
if you're the leader of a country.
And typically what you've go to do
is to cut back your spending in some way.
And try and get more money.
So that the impact of those
cut backs are not as severe,
as they other wise would be.
It's at that point that you
generally come to the IMF.
We are not for sale.
And tell them
anytime they are willing to
deal with an unruly Jamaican
based on principal,
suffrage, pride, and dignity.
Then we will talk the
investment of the money.
Bare in mind, this is a country
literally beginning to unravel.
Because it can not finance what it needs.
You can't have no
penicillin in the hospital.
You can't have no wheat to make bread.
And we would say yep, that's true.
We understand the crisis you're in.
And we need to fix the underlying reasons.
For that crisis.
And so here is what we think needs doing.
What you really need
is to sit down with them and say look
can I work out a five year program.
And in the meantime, I'm
strapped for some cash,
so can you help me upfront
get out of the cash bind
and then put it in the context
of a long term development plan.
And they say no.
Long term development is your problem.
We are here only to see who
do you owe the money to,
why are you in a bind,
and we lend you some money
in a very short time frame.
At full interest rate.
To get you out of the bind.
And they then impose upon
you tremendous restrictions
in what you can spend.
When we reach agreement on
a set of measures on the budget,
on the exchange rate, on monetary policy,
on interest rates, on banks,
on maybe privatization,
and say yep we think this
could solve your problem.
And you say to them
but if I do it that way,
when I finish repay you I'm
gonna be in the bind all over.
Because they can't solve my problem.
They say not our problem.
Okay, this is the banana plantation.
And you know the banana they
say is just like a woman,
takes nine months for baring.
You pass a building stranded
in an acre of over grown grass
and you think to your self
that it's very existence
must fall under the Department of Health.
It is an outhouse.
A public latrine.
But when you look again you see a sign
that proclaims this building as a school.
The sign says, "Basic School".
And what could that
mean, the basic school?
We have this big word up here.
Who can tell me what is this word?
But before
you can occupy yourself
with this question,
your heart skips a beat.
For your driver has decided to over take
the car in front of him.
but it would cause your heart
to skip more than a beat
if you knew there was
not a hospital nearby.
That no new hospitals
have been built in Jamaica
for many years now should not concern you.
You're on your holiday.
The whole idea was to set conditions
which the government could not meet.
When the government failed to meet them
you would have to renegotiate a new loan
in which the conditions became tighter.
So IMF didn't say cut out
this education program
or cut out this health program.
What IMF said was you must spend
only so much money on
health and education.
And the implication of that
was that you had to cut out some programs.
Essentially what the IMF wanted us to do
was to devalue our currency.
That's the first thing.
To make our dollar cheaper.
They needed to expand their exports
and diminish their imports.
And the best way of doing that
is to make foreign
currency more expansive.
And since our society
is so heavily dependent on
imported food, imported fuel,
imported books to go to
school, imported medicine.
When we devalue,
the costs of those things we
import go up to the citizens.
And as a result the economy today
is much more under the
control of foreigners.
Not necessarily through direct ownership
but through the mechanism of debt.
In the 1970's we owed 800 million dollars.
By the end of the 1980's we
owed four billion dollars.
Now a days, we owe seven billion dollars.
So the debt is rising.
And all the time the debt is rising,
our capacity to export, to
produce, is getting less.
♪ Revolution seem to be the only way ♪
♪ It may be an old ♪
fashion way of thinking ♪
Ohhhh, but now you're tired
of all this looking and you
want to reach your destination.
Your hotel, your room.
♪ One day dem deh deh dem no deh deh ♪
♪ Yeah ♪
Well what we do is called
The Sunshine Guarantee.
Just in case the sun
doesn't come out any at all
for the entire day.
You're entitled to a free day
or what we call a free night.
And these are your room keys.
(upbeat island music)
Oh, what beauty.
You've never seen anything like this.
You are so excited.
You see yourself lying on the beach
enjoying that amazing sun.
A sun that is your personal friend.
Ready to stamp out any cloud
that dares to darken your day.
♪ One love ♪
♪ One heart ♪
You see yourself eating some
delicious locally grown food.
You see yourself.
♪ One love ♪
♪ One heart ♪
You must not wonder exactly what happened
to the contents of your
lavatory when you flushed it.
You must not wonder where
your bath water went
when you pulled out the stopper.
For you see, Jamaica does not yet have
a proper way of disposing
of all it's sewage.
But the Caribbean Sea is very big.
And the Atlantic Ocean is even bigger.
It would amaze you to know the number
of African slaves this
ocean has swallowed up.
When you sit down to
eat your delicious meal
it's probably better you don't know
that everything you're eating
came off a ship from Miami.
There is a world of something in this.
But I can't get into it right now.
You guys on your honeymoon, eh?
Yes.
Really shows much, alright?
They're beaming, alright?
Alright guys, so when you go to the clubs
or anywhere you're going
where your gonna drink,
wear your keys on your arms,
in your hair, on your legs.
Where we can see them.
We'll go to the front desk, get
you a number, take you home.
You puke?
No problem man.
Drink 'til you're filled.
If you get totally
intoxicated, it's no problem.
You're on holidays.
Bounce.
And from the bouncing, we're
gonna warm you up a little bit.
First of all, our very first
move we're gonna be doing,
is moving the feet.
Just putting them forward, left and right.
Stepping forward.
Here we go.
Left and then right, come on.
Left and then right.
(African drumming music and chants)
Farmin', which is the backbone
of our economy so to speak.
You find that the very farmers,
we are farmin' produce,
you know, right?
You have tons of cabbage
or worse in Jamaica.
Because goods come in from
America selling cheaper.
That what produce here.
Than the produce here.
So you'll find just extracting
more than puttin' in.
The Jamaica that I knew,
the Jamaica in which I grew up,
is not the Jamaica that you,
a tourist, would see now.
That Jamaica no longer exists.
That Jamaica no longer exists
partly for the usual reason.
The passing of time.
And partly because of
this new global economy.
(birds chirping)
Well.
When you see the onion produce this year,
you can look at every house or every yard
that you see around here.
Everybody, old, young, middle aged,
involved in pickin' out onion.
Sewin' onion.
Reapin' onion.
Baggin' up onion.
So everybody was involved
in the production
in this district.
But right now it is just a
trickle, just a debris for them.
When it's ready for harvesting,
you see imported potato.
Right out in front of your home.
Being sold.
Potato that's grown in Idaho
are new problems 'cause some of the parts.
(phone ringing)
Hello?
The shipment come every week, you know.
Them are US, they're America.
Then on that Canada.
(drowned out by thick accent)
When I was a little boy I grew.
Everybody that you see 'round here
they had us plantin' peanuts.
All those years are over.
Over and gone.
All these land is what
we used to farm carrots.
Now we can not farm anymore.
We don't got any market for it.
'Cause it's true findin' carrots.
It's an insult to our dignity.
To not bein' able to produce and sale
in your own market at home.
This is a free market.
And I've learned that because of
the financial problem that
the government is under.
With the World Bank and the IMF.
They are the one that
institute the pressure
on the government as far as we learned.
No, we had a protected market.
The government said no import.
And then no, we compete with one another.
But for the time being
you're open for the world.
To compete with the world.
Before, we was unable
to bring in anything
because of the policy of the country.
But lately it change.
The difference with a person who comes
in from farm with his trailer
is that he has now been givin'
legal right to bring it in.
So I'm not fighting him.
I'm fighting the policy maker.
The person who is foolish
enough to sign such a policy.
Some of the descriptions in our program
usually seeks to implement
is to get countries to
eliminate artificial barriers to trade.
That would require a country
with an Army program,
not to impose artificial
restrictions on imports.
And not to unduly subsidize exports.
So when a person brings on his trailer,
whether he's in Kingston or up here,
when that farmer gets smarter
and get on the trailer line,
he will full his pocket of money.
But what will happen to the
other thousands of farmers?
We are fattening a few people
at the expense of a whole culture.
That took years to build up.
And you destroy it with
the stroke of the pen.
He who holds the handle,
and you hold the blade.
You know, if you want
the money badly enough
then you have to agree to his terms.
So ultimately the IMF usually
gets most of their own way.
Why did we think they
should reduce trade barriers?
The reason is Jamaica
is a very small country.
It's not a country which
could sort of thrive
by producing only for it's self.
We believe very firmly that
countries are gonna grow better
if they're integrated
into the world economy.
And that means reducing tariffs.
And it needed to allow it's
importers, it's people,
access to goods from
the rest of the world.
Rather than have them rely
on this little economy.
Market vendors
also complained about
the large number of foreign fruits
and vegetables on the market.
Saying all of the foreign foods
were hurting their business.
The foreign Irish, the foreign
carrot, the foreign ginger,
everything full up the market.
But the super markets seem
to be doing well with over seas produce.
As their being sold for
less than the local produce.
So you're saying that the
foreign lettuce and carrots
are less expensive then the
local lettuce and carrot?
Yes, that's what I'm seeing.
When you open up the market place,
those who are in a better position
to take advantage of the market do so.
We import the spray,
we import the fertilizer,
we import the seed.
So what we have to put in?
Only the sunlight.
Only in pack.
And if we use that right
we produce a better quality
but at a higher cost.
The problem is that we are competing
with an unfair situation.
In this days, nobody hires
money for over 10 percent.
The lowest cost here now is 19 percent.
And it can be as high as 40 percent.
In Washington they just
looked at us and said
no, no, no, no, you're inflation
last year was 18 percent.
And under the positive inflation
rate theory of interest,
that means we're not allowing
you to lend your farmers
our money which we lend you at 12 percent.
You must charge 23 percent.
I remember I took two
trips, it was, to Washington
to say it is wrong, it is
wrong, you can not make policy.
It is wrong socially.
It is wrong to say that
we must force the farmers
to pay that rate of interest
or you won't lend us the money.
Typically in an IMF program
there'll be some assumption
about the way interest rates are gonna go.
And I remember saying which of you
will go face an American farmer
and tell him that to borrow
something for his farm
he must pay 23 percent?
I said they'd run you out of
The White House and out of Congress.
That's their business.
We are dealing with your business.
(laughing)
We use machete to farm.
But the world in general use machine.
So when you check it out.
Can machete compete with machine?
The farmin' section is
nearly completely wiped out.
Anything that led to
the more self-reliance
on our resources was strongly discouraged.
Because of this emergent ideology
which we now call globalization.
My name is Tom Lipetzky,
I'm with the United States Potato Board,
and we represent about
6000 potato producers
in The United States.
One of the markets which we found to be
of very much interest is
right here in Jamaica.
Get you up here in this rehearsal.
There we go, okay.
Everybody say potato.
Potato.
Jamaican potato.
We had offers from
Washington from some guys.
A group of guys.
We asked them what they
wanted to buy from us.
And there wasn't anything
they could buy from us.
They just want to sell us potato seeds.
We are not short of potato seeds.
That is not our problem.
I'll give you a joke
talk about gettin' goods
in The United States.
I sign a contract to produce
honeydew melon and cherry tomato.
And you know what happen?
Everything I send to the
package, they turn it down.
Say it not reach a standard.
They say don't package good.
The size that we have is not
matchin' with their size.
And the system went one so rotten with me.
Now you know what I did?
Discarded total.
NAFTA or whatever
they called it free in the press.
They're not free, they
flow like the Mississippi.
It flows in one direction
into the Gulf Of Mexico.
It never goes back up the hill.
And where as the Gulf
Of Mexico can absorb it.
Jamaica can not absorb
the flow from Europe
and from North America.
All coming in on us.
This is our country, our turf.
Gives us back our market.
Don't try to force your idea on us.
But now we are finding that the thieves
are become more desperate.
As a result now we have as
farmer have to be planning.
And as people see that we use the
kneel and the needle system.
These pegs they having needles.
So when the thief come now to grab,
to grab this and harvest them,
the needle hit the hand.
I have learned from the bible
at 2nd Timothy, chapter
three, and verse one,
that the last day here
would be difficult and hard to deal with.
So I am looking for it to be hard.
And I am seeing it pelting,
we are pushing me right into hard.
But bare in mind the scripture
said hard to deal with.
It is not to say can't deal with.
(African drum music and chanting)
We do rule under a government.
But the government not seeing
the things through other people.
Are to doing things to other people.
What they are doing between
the American government
and the Jamaican government
is to seal giant hands
and hurt the poorer class
of people more and more.
But what will it be
through our government still,
is just the money where they want
and do business with a term.
That's really go with the money.
The terms and conditions
will go with the money.
It's true the money.
So we are so poor that these rich people
use the money for real.
Just push their money before
like it's a gift.
But really it's a trap.
(roosters crowing)
(cows mooing)
We have this dairy farm has been going
from in the early '40's.
My father farmed here before me.
'Twas on a continual rise in production.
The industry flourished
from 18 million liters a year
to over 30.
I think we peaked at around
34 million liters in '91.
In 1992 the government
entered into an agreement
with the Inter-American Development Bank
for a loan of about 50 million US dollars.
Which was to support
agriculture and manufacturing.
The conditionalities of those were that
we should abandon any
farm of local subsidies
and we should abandon any control
of the imports of milk powder,
meats, and what have you.
Almost always when the
IMF is lending to a country,
a developing country,
we'll be making loans,
the World Bank will be making loans
and efforts in the Americas,
the Inter-American Development Bank,
which is a regional
counterpart of the World Bank,
will be making loans.
See you couldn't get World Bank
unless IMF gave you the bill of health.
And you couldn't get IMF
unless the World Bank
gave you bill of health.
And you couldn't get either unless
the Inter-American Development Bank
gave you a clean bill of health.
Cross conditionality.
That is when they finally had
you by two nooses by the neck.
Because we were working
together in that country,
we have to make sure we are
not working at cross purposes,
so we will generally agree
on what needs to be done.
In conjunction with the loan agreement,
and at the same time,
the World Trade Organization signed off
all the member countries into
this new world order of trade.
This new world order
means that there will be
no government regulation in
the trading of any commodities.
They are telling you that well look,
if we lend you 50 million dollars,
in return you have to lower
all your trade barriers.
And you have to compete with us,
on a level playing field.
But that it all double talk.
It was at this time that the competition
for reconstituted mix
started to get to here.
We ended up with having
an influx of powder
which destroyed the dairy industry.
Powder became normal
form of milk consumption.
And the dairy industry was
unable to sell their fresh milk.
Frank Quarry
says he's been supplying
fresh milk to Century Farm
Products for 15 years.
After last Sunday's
collection he says he was told
that the company had too much milk
and would not collect any
more for an indefinite period.
So on Friday, with no where to
take five days worth of milk,
he had to get rid of it.
Dairy
cows has to be milked
twice a day, every day.
365 days a year.
So, yesterday and today's
milk, if it's not collected,
you'll have to pull the bar
and let it out in the drain.
This farm produced
about 3000 imperial quarts
of milk per day.
Right now, down to just
about 600 liters per day.
The animals that were lost
represented a lot of hard
work from a lot of pioneers.
My dad included.
And it obviously was a very,
very difficult decision to make
when we decided to convert
and ground hamburger meat.
It's incredible, how are we
able to get reconstituted milk
in Jamaica for less than fresh milk?
And it has to be produced at a
greater cost than fresh milk.
It is because it is just
one of a product mix
in countries where they price
some products to carry others.
And it's really just their huge surpluses.
Certain areas the Americans subsidize
their exported milk powder 137 percent.
Now nobody, nobody can compete with that.
The end of day result,
will mean we have no
national food security.
And that when milk powder
finds it's real cost,
where there are no subsidies
in the first world,
in Europe or North America,
it will be more expensive
than the milk that we currently produce.
What do we do in the meanwhile?
We go out of business.
It is unlikely,
when the milk order gets beyond
the reach of most Jamaicans,
that we will be able to restart
the dairy industry then.
So between the government
of Jamaica, the IMF,
and the Inter-American Development Bank
we ended up with these policies.
Ultimately I suppose,
our government have been
vision less and weak-kneed.
♪ Come away with me ♪
Here we go.
On the count of three
we're gonna set you free.
One.
Two.
Three.
Looking for the biggest
splash this afternoon.
Oh my goodness, that
indeed is a big splash.
Come on everybody let's
give it up for the man.
Jamaica is beautiful.
Jamaica is too beautiful.
Sometimes the beauty of it seems unreal.
Sometimes the beauty of it seems
as if it were stage sets for a play.
For no real sea water could strike
that many shades of blue at once.
No real day could be that
perfectly sunny and bright.
And what might it do to ordinary people
to live in this way everyday?
You taste a delicious
Jamaican grown banana
for the very first time.
You wonder how it is that you've never
tasted such a sweet banana before.
♪ Day-O ♪
♪ Daylight come and me wan go home ♪
♪ Day ♪
♪ Me say day, me say day, me say day ♪
♪ Me say day, me say day-o ♪
♪ Daylight come and me wan go home ♪
♪ Work all night and a drink a rum ♪
♪ Stop banana peeling ♪
♪ Mornin' come ♪
♪ Daylight come and me wan go home ♪
♪ Come Mr. Tallyman ♪
♪ Tally me banana ♪
♪ Daylight come and me wan go home ♪
♪ Come Mr. Tallyman ♪
♪ Tally me banana ♪
♪ Daylight come and me wan go home ♪
♪ A beautiful bunch ♪
♪ A ripe banana ♪
♪ Daylight come and me wan go home ♪
♪ Hide the deadly black tarantula ♪
♪ The six foot, seven ♪
foot, eight foot, march ♪
♪ Daylight come and me wan go home ♪
♪ Six foot, seven foot, ♪
eight foot, march ♪
♪ Daylight come and me wan go home ♪
♪ Day ♪
♪ Me say day-o ♪
I actually was born on
a banana farm for years.
And I've been doin' banana
for all these years.
Until (difficult to hear through accent)
effect this industry.
I've been on the banana
farm in the early '60's.
And ever since then we
are not exporting now
because of the situation
and the way they treat us.
We produce an export.
And we would love to continue
export to the fullest.
Jamaica produces at the moment,
in the region of 90
thousand tons of bananas.
All of which go into the UK.
And that is our market.
Europeans who had colonies in the past
thought it good,
let us put it that way,
that they should help
these colonies to overcome
some of their difficulties
to get them ready
for new technology, to get
them ready for the future.
Under the Lome Agreement,
this is an agreement
between ACP countries,
African, Caribbean, Pacific countries,
with the European Union.
And the ACP countries
enjoyed certain privileges
because of their colonial past.
And these countries in Europe
feel that they should give
back something to the colonies
in order to help them to
take their rightful place
in this world.
As far as the banana trade is concerned,
we have in Europe, a
guaranteed market, tariff free.
The American's, and
to be brutally frank,
I think it's Mr. Lindner and
his millionaires at Chiquita,
are pressuring the ex-colonial countries
through the WTO.
To get the WTO to agree that
these preferential rates
are unconstitutional and
against the WTO regime.
The United States don't
produce any bananas.
The multi-nationals have
set up their government
to protest at the level of the WTO
and affect the lives of a lot of people
in the ACP countries.
And the
worrisome banana issue
and the recent World
Trade Organization ruling,
President Bill Clinton
assured the Caribbean
that his country did not add to
the detriment of the Caribbean.
Pursuing
and winning our case
at the World Trade Organization,
our target was a
discriminatory European system,
not the Caribbean nations.
I made it clear, that as
we work toward a solution
with our European partners,
we will continue to
support duty free access
for Caribbean bananas
in a European market.
And we will seek ways to promote
diversification of the
Caribbean economies.
We have no access to
the American market.
The access we have is through Europe.
And through England in particular.
And that is what Chiquita and the US
are trying to kill at this stage.
Big companies, which are
American owned, Chiquita, Dole,
and they already control 95 percent
of the world market in bananas.
But these companies want the whole hog.
Chiquita, Dole, Del Monte,
all of these banana is being
grown in Latin America.
Latin America is at
the will of the master.
Who owns these plantations.
Salaries for the workers are pretty low.
In one instance, I made to understand,
it's one US dollar per day.
And nobody can exist on that sort of rate.
Surely you would be able to produce
cheaper bananas at that rate.
But at what cost?
Socially and morally?
(speaking
in foreign language)
Some Chiquita banana
workers went on strike.
They were literally forced to
go back to work with a gun.
23 people were killed.
There are no unions.
Our bananas cost us more to produce
than the South American bananas.
We actually cost us 11 US dollars
to produce 40 pounds of our bananas.
While it cost them 5 US dollars
for that same 40 pounds.
We aren't able to do much of
the price of South American's.
Well in the past things
was very bright with us.
But in the present right now,
things slowed because the
production gone down very low.
Two years ago we had about 150 workers.
Today it's about 15 workers on the farm.
My farm in particular,
we have been trying to find investors
to increase our capital,
over the last two or three years.
But especially since
the adverse WTO ruling,
nobody will touch bananas.
The banks won't invest in it.
Private investors won't invest in it.
Because the future looks dim.
In five more years, banana
was up, banana was good.
We could call it green gold in those days.
Because a farmer could export his banana.
He could have a nice building.
He could have a car.
But no, you just living on survival now.
All we can do we can plant the bananas
because we love to plant.
Right?
But we can't sustain our
children on banana anymore.
And that is the reason,
one of the main reason,
finding a young man out on the street now
lootin' and shootin'.
Because his parents
can't help him anymore.
'Cause banana, just banana,
we used to think of to send
our children to school.
We would
like to have some better things
going for us here than
for us to be cut out
completely out of the
market here in Jamaica.
(laughing)
Alright hunny, you know what I like.
(cheering)
(upbeat dance music)
(waves crashing)
Good morning guys!
I'mma say welcome to Jamaica.
Thank you.
My name is Gene.
Alright, I'm gonna be your driver today.
Yeah man.
Must have enough respect, you know.
First time in Jamaica?
Yes.
Where are you from?
Chicago.
California.
Alright.
England.
Okay, I know you drive
on the left also, alright.
First day on the job for me.
Tomorrow I go for my driving test.
(laughing)
Highest mountain we have
is the Blue Mountain.
7402 feet high.
And that's where you get the best coffee.
And it's the best in the world.
That's the Blue Mountain Coffee.
♪ Blessed love ♪
♪ Keeps burning ♪
♪ On and on ♪ ♪
♪ They've been yearning ♪
♪ Redder than red ♪
♪ Babylon give dem ah ride fi they money ♪
♪ Get dem funny ♪
♪ And then brainwash dem ♪
pon dem western journey ♪
♪ Babylon give dem ah ride fi they money ♪
♪ Get dem funny ♪
♪ And then brainwash dem ♪
pon dem western journey ♪
♪ We tell dem say, this redder than red ♪
♪ The way how dis red ah ♪
bear blood ah run red ♪
♪ Go tell dem revolution ♪
ah swing over dem head ♪
♪ Fi all vampire this ♪
ya one ya ah yuh peg ♪
You decide to venture
from the sanctity of
your tropical compound.
You see natives.
You marvel at the things
they can do with their hair.
The things they fashion out of
cheap twine or ordinary cloth.
You havin' a good time?
Squatting
on the side of the road.
Hanging out with all
the time in the world.
You might look at them and think
they're so relaxed, so laid back,
they're never in a hurry.
♪ Babylon give dem ah ride fi they money ♪
♪ Get dem funny ♪
♪ And then brainwash dem ♪
pon dem western journey ♪
♪ Babylon give dem ah ride fi they money ♪
♪ Get dem funny ♪
♪ And then brainwash dem ♪
pon dem western journey ♪
Every native from every
place is a potential tourist.
And every tourist is a
native of some where.
Every native would like to find a way out.
Every native would like a rest.
Every native would like a tour.
But some natives, most
natives in the world,
can not go anywhere.
They're too poor to escape
the realities of their lives.
And they're too poor to live properly
in the place where they live.
Which is the very place that,
you the tourist, want to go.
So when the natives see you,
the tourist, they envy you.
They envy your own ability to leave
your own banality and boredom.
They envy your ability to turn their own
banality and boredom into a
source of pleasure for yourself.
♪ Try reach we level you ♪
drop off and strain ♪
♪ Appointed and anointed ♪
ghetto youths dem ordain ♪
♪ Mi say fi lef the youths ♪
and uno fi stop wuk fi fame ♪
♪ Words without works cyar sustain ♪
♪ And King Selassie say fi ♪
tell yuh this one ah no game ♪
♪ Sopt call Emperor ♪
Selassie name inna vain ♪
♪ Babylon give you ah ride fi the money ♪
♪ Get yuh funny ♪
♪ And then brainwash you ♪
pon dem western journey ♪
(gate creaking)
Two.
Three.
And he's off.
He's off.
And he's going.
Ohhh my goodness, smooth.
And he's up to his second beer.
And it's all gone.
Come on everybody lets here it for Drew.
Chug, chug, chug.
Ohhhh boy!
Ohhhh!
Ohhhhhh!
Oh boy.
It is gonna be.
Oh my goodness.
Try to remain on your feet guys.
Oh boy!
Come on everybody give it up for Don.
Now you employ four workers.
How much a week do you pay the workers?
How much do you get per
day out of the workers?
So all what you get bein' going away.
And nothing been seen
stayin' in the country.
So the country been
gettin' poorer and poorer.
And the people be gettin' more frustrated.
More and more.
Like in the Free Zone.
Where we turn the slaves ones.
You find the average worker is workin'
far less than what that
company would have paid
a worker in America.
♪ We got the five days to go ♪
♪ Workin for the next day ♪
♪ Four days to go ♪
♪ Workin for the ♪
♪ Three days to go now ♪
♪ Workin for the next day ♪
♪ Two days to go ♪
♪ Said we got ♪
♪ One day to go now ♪
The Free Zone is an area.
I would consider it to be
like a state in our country.
(muffled speaking)
(classical music)
We sew, we put on a label, we trim.
I was sewing the pockets.
The Free Zones came into
Jamaica in the 1980's.
The US government decided on
a Caribbean based initiative.
With their idea of creating
a lot of employment
of the lower level basis.
The Caribbean Development
Bank gives them money,
the World Bank gives them money,
in order to build the actual structures.
The government is paying back the loans
on all the Free Zones.
This will take some time.
All the material for
this production process
come in in trailers
from the United States.
These materials consist of cutters
that are cut in the US, made
in the US, and put in bundles.
This also involves
implantation of elastic,
and trim, and thread,
and all the components.
This product is made of 100
percent USA made material
and we only assemble it in Jamaica.
Trade in my tear ups and
take them from my brother
and don't buy them in Jamaica.
Them said they don't want to
spend their money in Jamaica.
It was really collars or the sides.
All you do is shoulder part.
You must finish about
10 bundle for the day.
I was doin' the Tommy Hilfiger.
I was on that section.
So about Tommy
Hilfigers, Brooks Brothers.
Them do like Tommy, Brooks Brothers,
Earth Childs, and Marc Alexander Sports.
I don't know how much
them really get for a shirt.
But I hear that them get a good amount.
When I was first employed,
I heard that we were to
get the money in the US.
But the government said no.
They must change it all time
and give it us in Jamaican.
Because they need the US.
The country need the US.
They're able to come
in for a number of years,
without payin' certain taxes.
The Free Zone operates
in the theoretical theme
that it's not even part of Jamaica.
It is a separate entity.
So the goods come in in a container.
And go through guarded gates.
After it leaves the Free Zone
it goes back on to the ship.
Never in effect having
touched the shores of Jamaica.
So those factories are not
liable to local controls.
They're not liable to
things like income tax,
or certain duties, taxes,
anything like that.
The Free Zone is to give
the opportunity of people
to operate without the controls,
or the laws, or the systems
that normally govern
a countries operation.
If you get the collar to
sew, you have to sew the 600,
if you don't sew the 600
you know that you don't get paid for that.
A lot of pressure 'cause
they pressure ya a lot.
They tell you have to go fast, fast, fast.
The rate that we get in
Jamaica is after work.
Five days a week, for the week
to get 1200 Jamaican dollars.
Which is valued 30 US dollars.
(water running)
My salary, I received 1005.
In the US that is 30 dollars.
30 US dollars.
Every two weeks.
And when you look at that,
actually there's no where in the US,
where people's basic pay or minimum wage,
is 30 dollars per week.
This is my pay slip for the second week.
And they're drawing out an education tax,
NIS, NHT, for the health insurance.
And you something
like NIS, and education,
and tax and stuff like that.
But apparently they wasn't payin' it,
it was just takin' that money.
Because when I check it
out, I don't have any,
I wasn't payin' any tax
but it was bein' drawn out.
You have to buy a lunch for 75 dollar.
A drink for 25 dollar.
Someday I come home with nothing.
Persistent
complaints about work conditions
at the Kingston Free Zone led
our news team this morning,
to investigate complaints
against one factory there.
The Fine Line workers
stopped working on Monday.
Accusing the government
of being co-conspirators
in the exploitation of Free
Zone labor by foreign companies.
They say the problem began
in January of last year
when their pay suddenly began
to be issued two weeks late,
three weeks late, sometimes longer.
How can that happen?
No government. We don't
have any government.
We don't have nobody to stand for us.
Fine Line is
owned by a larger company
Schwitzer and Associates based
in Alexandria, Virginia, USA.
They were promise that the
workers would not be unionized.
They would not allow unions to come in.
You can't talk to nobody.
You can't eat.
You can't get up for go bathroom.
They're watching you.
Miserable.
It's like your workin' under slavery.
Every Thursday people get fired
and them not takin' on anybody
to work in the next year.
And then they're bringin'
the China to back it up.
To back up the Jamaicans.
And they treat the Chinese better than us.
There are even more problems
in the island's garment
sector this evening.
With production at one
factory all but stalled.
Thursday when
our news team arrived,
it seemed like a ticking bomb
finally saw a chance to explode.
The East Ocean Company brought
in a lot of Asian workers.
I think, maybe up to 800 people.
These workers are brought in hundreds.
And they living with the concept
of being camps situation.
So they are hold in one place.
We were not allowed
in one of the main factories.
But our camera caught a
glimpse of the interior.
The Jamaicans workers say the women,
who started coming in
from earlier this month,
were givin' more over time
work and hence more money.
Them don't object to nothing.
'Cause they are get paid in US.
Meanwhile Jamaican get
paid in Jamaican currency.
Can the
government afford this
influx of foreign workers?
When the great Free Zone promise
was to elevate those very
same unemployment problems?
Obviously we are trying to provide
employment for Jamaicans, not Asians.
They claimed that they couldn't
get the people in Jamaica
with a skill level that
they needed for that job.
If the government asked
them to give us more probably
they will close down the
factories and go to Mexico.
Because most of them gone to Mexico.
Because them say they are cheaper labor.
You know these companies
are very aggressive to make profits.
And they are accountable
to their shareholders.
So they basically just went.
You know, they're in a
position to move the production
to areas that are you
know, cheaper for them.
I worked there for 15 years
and they fired me for low production.
Say I'm not doing enough.
They want me to go 1000
and I couldn't go up to it.
The Free Trade and NAFTA agreements
have impacted initially
very badly on Jamaica.
We have lost, I think 18,000 jobs.
It's getting worser.
More factory closing down.
Low wage jobs do move or
gravitate to low wage areas.
This is happening throughout the world.
Especially with the new order.
The garment
factory on Marcus Garvey Drive
has thrown over 400
workers into a tail spin.
Two weeks ago
the workers received a letter
which stated the factory would be
closing temporarily for restructuring.
Allegations flew that the Asian managers
had dismantled and sold
the factory equipment.
And packed their bags in
preparation for a hasty departure.
The factory will not reopen tomorrow
and the majority of
workers have not been paid.
The government did the
factories with loans from
international agencies like
the IMF and the World Bank.
That's the thing of the loans.
Loan makers know paying out
52 cents out of every dollar
that it collects in
interest payment on debt,
that leaves 48 cents
to do everything else.
The interesting thing is
that even though the loans
are being paid back now
at the high interest rate
because of the exchange rate,
more factories are closing, and
more people are out of jobs.
So I don't see the purpose,
the real purpose has not been made.
Them say Free Zone is for
the poor but I don't see it.
I better them close down the zone,
make we organize something for our selves,
and sell the product out here.
My feel say it would be much better.
Over 500 workers have been
added to the unemployment line,
as Hanes Jamaica Limited ended today
the weeks of speculation
and officially announced that
yes it was closing it's Hanover Plant.
A real break through
in combating poverty
can only be achieved if these countries
build up the fundamentals for growth
and gain access to the investment capital
of the international markets.
But private capital
is not going to come in
and help you with your infrastructure.
To help you develop an
adequate education system.
To help you develop a good health system.
Private capital is not going
to come and take a chance
on developing your agriculture
so that you can really do a
lot of the feeding of yourself.
It is understandably only interested
in how can it make a quick saved buck.
And no qualm, what else
would it be interested in?
♪ Working for ♪
♪ Every day is work ♪
♪ Work and work ♪
The question of where
is the power in the IMF.
First the votes of each
country are in proportion
roughly to it's size in the world economy.
So US has just over
17.5 percent of the vote
because it's the biggest
economy in the world.
Japan has the second most
votes and Germany the third.
So in that sense the US is by
far the biggest single voice.
To change anything in IMF you
need 80 percent of the vote.
And I think the United States
and Western European countries
control more than 80 percent of the vote.
Which means you can't
change anything in IMF
unless you get their approval.
♪ Dem an dem economical plan ♪
♪ Still can't find a solution ♪
♪ Borrowin' money fe lend ♪
♪ World bank a nuh wi fr'en ♪
♪ Is life an' debt all a wi a fret ♪
♪ Life an' debt freedom not yet ♪
♪ Farmers get a blow ♪
♪ Foreign food suh an'suh ♪
♪ Amerikan farmer get a upper hand ♪
♪ W'ile our farmers goin' one be one ♪
♪ Bank crash pay slash news flash ♪
♪ Big bway hide 'im stash ♪
♪ Nuh money nuh job ♪
♪ Borrowin money fi lend ♪
♪ Capitalism a nuh wi fren ♪
Look at every IMF country today.
And tell me which has a
really good hospital service.
Which has a good education system.
Which has anything.
All of them
but trapped in that old
colonial crisis of finance.
♪ Life an' debt ♪
No where else to go through
but the IMF and the World Bank.
They're already powerful enough
and get into our systems.
I think in dealing with people like
the IMF and the World Bank
it's important that you
do your homework so well.
That you don't take to them a plan
where they dictate to you what to do.
They were not created
by an international body
that included the interest
of developing countries.
Haiti is a country where we live
with less than 250 US dollars per capital.
That means if you are just follow the
structural adjustment
program without thinking
on the economy exclusion of the people
you will just collect money to pay
the interest of the debt
and not investing in people.
♪ Nuh more blind faith ♪
♪ Wi need food inna wi plate ♪
♪ Look how long wi a sweat ♪
♪ Too much foreign debt ♪
Those who are
responsible of those institutions
they may have good will, quote unquote,
but the results are telling so many others
that it's not what we have.
As a matter of fact, why do we have today
1.3 billion people in the world
living with less than one dollar a day?
Those who control others
have no interest in whether
you are self-sustaining.
They are doing their work.
Their duty.
If the pressures that they put
force you to a greater
dependence on foreign capital.
So you see it's not as
simple as capital coming in.
What kind of capital?
And does the capital help you
to become self-sustaining?
That dollars could be
used in so many products
grown in Jamaica.
Like Irish potatoes, and
seasoning, and vegetables.
In other words, what they do
is import all these things.
So that is all them stronger.
The small governments.
Come in and let them buildin'.
But we're breakin' down
without them buildin'.
The case was very important
because it was the first case in Jamaica
dealing with the effect of globalization
in that commercial respect.
US McDonald's claimed
that Jamaican company
was passing off it's business as theirs.
By using the name McDonald's
they would cause people to think
that they were really a
branch of the US company.
And the Jamaican company insisted
that they were here first.
And had been here for over
20 years using the name.
The US company claimed that
by opening offices here
that they would provide employment,
they would purchase
stock and raw materials
from local producers,
and they would be able
to help the economy.
They placed great emphasis on the size
our their advertising budget.
They spent millions of dollars world-wide
promoting the name.
And they argued that that gave them,
in all countries that
received US satellite TV,
that had US magazines on sale,
people in that country
would necessarily know
about McDonald's and associate
the name with that company.
The simple aspect was that the nature
of the Jamaican operation was
such as to confuse no one.
On today's menu we have curry goat,
roast beef, fish and chips,
chicken and green peas.
They sold to a large extent
traditional Jamaican fare.
The judge refused to close
down the Jamaican company.
And that did create some pressure
because Chamber of
Commerce and similar people
were calling us to say
you're keeping out business
and your preventing the
development of the economy.
It's a question of what's fair
for the citizens of that country.
If they're working, and
they're manufacturing,
and they're producing,
why shouldn't they have
the right to buy things
that other people have
in the rest of the world?
You know there was Burger
King, and Kentucky Fried,
and pizza, and just all of the things
of mass consumption in American Society.
In a society that does
not have a productive base
to sustain this.
McDonald's started talking
to us about three years ago.
This facility, which cost
us 40 millions to upgrade,
was put in place to facilitate people
like McDonald's and Burger King.
Increase our production and make factories
that they wouldn't have
to be importin' them.
McDonald's have asked us to
supply them with a faster plan.
We have done that.
We have made burgers for them
which they have sampled
and found to be okay.
In fact, the taste has been much better
than the ones they had imported.
But we still have not
been able to supply them.
Beef farmers from several parishes,
who've been hurting from the invitation
of less expensive meat,
today vented their frustrations against
fast food giant McDonald's.
Yeah well I've been
in farmin' from 1977.
And I've never had a problem
in all those years sellin' cow.
Until last year.
Although these animals have
been sold from December.
We just can't sell them.
In America you wouldn't find cows
grazin' their pasture like this.
They are injected with anabolic
steroid know as Stilbestrol.
We can't use Stilbestrol here.
Just doesn't come into the country.
But it's being used on farms abroad.
So when the people are
consumin' imported beef,
they are really exposin' themselves
to cancer causin' agents.
We had a case where one
of the local businessman
thought it'd be a good deal if he could
buy some chicken cheap.
And they came up with an idea
that they would import some chicken.
This chicken it turns out,
upon examination was I
think about 20 years old.
When we determined that
yes it was not for human consumption,
he tried to convince us that the shipment
only came here accidentally.
And that the shipment
was in fact for Haiti.
And that we should release
it back into his custody
so he could send it on to Haiti.
I been in America.
I never seen no where in a store
where them sell chicken back.
But yet I see leave America
and come to Jamaica.
Well it's from slavery.
And remember slavery was that
the master would eat what
he consider the better part
and then the slaves would get the refuse.
So the back, and the neck, and tail,
and the foot, and all these things,
is like a third world
country dumpin' ground.
(man chanting)
A very interesting thing
in the US poultry market
has been the development of
the passion for white meat.
Obviously, if you take the
breast meat off of the chicken,
you're left with the dark meat.
The leg, and the thigh,
and the neck, and the back.
As a consequence there is more
and more of the dark meat.
Which is imported from the
United States of America.
And that has really been the threat
to our market at this point.
When the cost of producing a
pound of breast chicken meat
in the states is very
likely about 50 cents,
it was being offered to Jamaica
as low as 20 cents a pound.
This had a traumatic affect in terms of
our local industry and
our ability to compete.
There's no doubt that
the markets in our region
are being targeted by the US industry
in terms of penetrating
and supplying those markets
at the detriment to the local industry
and the possible loss of jobs.
The labor dispute involving
management and workers
who were made redundant at the
Jamaica Boiler Spring Village
Plant in St. Catherine
turned nasty today.
Over 200 chicken farmers,
who've been suffering losses
since the shut down of the plant,
protested to bring
attention to their plight.
Former workers demonstrating
outside the plant
clashed with the police,
resulting in an all out brawl,
in which a number of persons were injured
and a vehicle belonging
to the plant set on fire.
Mr. Wildish noted several
initiatives had been taken,
without success, to achieve
international competitiveness.
We're told that we've got
to find areas we can compete.
And we say what?
What are these niche markets
that we're meant to be going after?
They tell us well peppers,
and spices, and these things.
You should be able to
grow those efficiently.
And you do have tourism.
Karen, you are runnin' the white.
Glen, you are runnin' the green crab.
And Robin, you are runnin' the yellow.
So on the count of three we're
gonna set the crabs free.
Remember no sudden movements.
One, two, three.
Alright, everybody is off.
But the red is in the lead now.
Just by two crab lengths.
And it could be stopped in the middle.
The yellow hasn't moved up 'til now.
We don't know what's happenin' with him.
The white has now taken over the lead.
The green is still on.
(laughing)
The green is still on the goal.
Patricia is coachin' her crab.
So the white crab is
the winner of that race.
Up to you to tell us
who you think has the best tan.
We can see Scott is well tan.
So Tim can turn around so that
everybody can see your tan.
Nobody said I had to
compete against guys.
(elevator dings)
♪ Circumstances led me where I am ♪
♪ Was I born a violent man ♪
When I got here with the.
We had about maybe 120 guards.
Today we are probably
about 18, 1900 guards.
We have 300 dogs.
And we have branches all over the island.
♪ May sound strange ♪
♪ Might sound foolish ♪
♪ But things ain't gettin' better ♪
♪ Everyday I gonna fall victim to the ♪
Is it a growing industry?
I would say yes it is.
I mean with the high crime rate,
you know there's always a need
to protect life and property.
We do work for the hotels, all the homes,
we do whole home protection as well.
♪ Circumstances made me what I am ♪
♪ Was I born a violent man ♪ ♪
The violence cause a lot of death.
Uh-huh, the violence.
With all the violence you
don't have so much people
really that stealin' now.
I've been furniture
industry about for 30 years.
For 30 years.
But the furniture business
about 2 years now,
I started to make the coffin for them.
The furniture thing kinda went slow like.
What you going to sell?
♪ I pray the day never fall ♪
♪ When I come away to the sound of drum ♪
♪ Never leavin' this ♪
In the end you know you
struggle, you survive,
and much much suffering later,
I suppose you slowly begin
to come out the other end.
But the country that comes out
is nothing like the country
that it could have been.
♪ Sing our praise ♪
♪ Of the forest, the ♪
water, and shining sun ♪
♪ Ay yay yay yay ♪
♪ Give me my island in the sun ♪
Undeniably globalization has provided
enormous opportunities
for growth, investment,
and transfer of know-how and technology.
Where does Jamaica stand now?
It's interesting.
Incidentally there is an IMF program
with Jamaica at the moment.
We're not lending them money
but we have what's called
a staff monitored program.
We don't have an IMF agreement,
we are following what IMF
would have wanted us to do
on an agreement anyway.
So that influence of IMF
is still very much here.
We're not gettin' any IMF money,
but we're still doing
what they want us to do.
(soft flute music)
Tonight
there are violent protests
over higher prices and
fuel prices in Jamaica.
As many as six
people have been reported killed
in the unrest that is sweeping
across that Caribbean Island.
It escalated in the past 24 hours.
An 18 year old dead at this home.
The jump in the gas tax is hard
in a country with many poor.
The Government Defensive is a
way to pay for bank failures.
But now suggests there may
be room for compromise.
(yelling and screaming)
(airplane flying by)
♪ The lips of the righteous teaches many ♪
♪ But fools die for want of wisdom ♪
♪ The rich man's wealth is in the city ♪
And to this day the crisis in the UN,
if you want to know,
is the continuing demand of
the so called third world.
For our voice in strategic IMF policies,
so that they become
sensitive to our interest.
♪ Vexation of the soul is vanity ♪
♪ Destruction of the ♪
poor is their poverty ♪
♪ The poor man's wealth ♪
is in a holy holy place ♪
♪ Do do do do do do do do do do ♪
♪ Why do you fight each other? ♪
♪ Why do you kill your brother ♪
♪ Then your reward will be the cemetery ♪
It was a terrible experience.
You're just constantly,
it's like you're just living
a walking contradiction.
Every day of your life.
So you can imagine that with them
eventually had to go to them and
eventually have to sign
an agreement with them.
It was really one of the bitter,
traumatic experiences of my public life.
(soft flute music)
Jamaica was discovered
by Christopher Colombus in 1493.
Not too long after it was settled
by human rubbish from Europe.
Who used enslaved, but noble
and exulted human beings
from Africa to satisfy their
desire for wealth and power.
Eventually the masters left,
in a kind of way.
Eventually the slaves were freed,
Of course, the whole thing is,
once you cease to be a master,
you're no longer human rubbish,
you're just a human being
and all the things that adds up to.
So too with the slaves.
Once they are no longer slaves,
once they're free,
they are no longer noble and exulted,
they are just human beings.
♪ It's not enough for one man once ♪
♪ There's enough to feed ♪
the people in the world ♪
♪ Man must share ♪
♪ For judgin' love and kiss for everyone ♪
♪ It's not enough for one man once ♪
♪ There's enough to feed the world ♪
♪ So be still Babylon ♪
We must put our faith in the messiah.
That he will not desert us.
Or permit us to destroy humanity
that he created in his image.
We must look deep within ourselves,
into the depth of our souls.
We must become something
we have never been.
And for which our
education, and experience,
and environment have ill prepared us.
(speaking in foreign language)
So we know our salvation rest
in the hands of the Almighty.
♪ For dem give we basket ♪
♪ Fe go carry water ♪
♪ Ohhhh ♪
♪ Jah Rastafari Ohhhh ♪
The economic basical for
us doing this plantation
is to suffice people who
can not buy the cello
and other things for lower
price than we doing it.
We're trying to make ourselves
self-reliant and self-production.
Like we're planting cello lettuce.
We want onion, beets,
carrot, and other protein.
But the land is to small for us
and we are forceful people who
will put out the production.
And in the country, if the
government look for people,
like forceful people like us
who will put out production,
we can have our own thing
to supply our own country.
So we'd have a basical forceful people.
If you come
to Jamaica as a tourist,
this is what you will see.
♪ Yugguh yoi, yugguh yoi, yugguh yoi ♪
♪ Emperor Selassie I ♪
♪ Jah Jah is the only way ♪
♪ Nobody wannu plant the corn ♪
♪ Everybody want to raid the barn ♪
♪ Who yuh a guh blame it on ♪
♪ When is a next man yuh a depend 'pon ♪
♪ Well yuh wrong ♪
♪ Nobody wannu plant the corn ♪
♪ Everybody want to raid the barn ♪
♪ Haffi sing yuh owna song ♪
♪ Can't compete with careless John ♪
♪ I was looking a start, ♪
just a little ease off ♪
♪ No one would help me ♪
push that old had cart ♪
♪ Dem a laugh, never tek mi serious ♪
♪ So many goals and ♪
thoughts and potholes ♪
♪ I pass every day, my Lord, ♪
I have to pray on my way ♪
♪ Dem never realise with ♪
a little cooperation ♪
♪ Wi coulda unify ♪
relieve the frustration ♪
♪ Instead dem want to ride ♪
upon dem bredda back ♪
♪ No tears or cares if him ♪
even did stop or drop ♪
♪ Nobody wannu plant the corn ♪
♪ Everybody want to raid the barn ♪
♪ Who yuh a guh blame it on ♪
♪ When is a next man yuh a depend 'pon ♪
♪ Well yuh wrong ♪
♪ Nobody wannu plant the corn ♪
♪ Everybody want to raid the barn ♪
♪ You haffi sing yuh owna song ♪
♪ Can't compete with careless John ♪
♪ I feel please, when a tek a litte ease ♪
♪ From a long hard day of work ♪
♪ A sense of achieving, ♪
to know I'm contributing ♪
♪ Doing my part, ooh, dis is my comfort ♪
♪ I know, there is a reward ♪
for every trying man ♪
♪ Who walk this land, with an intention ♪
♪ To do good for himself and everyman ♪
♪ Just a meditation ♪
♪ Nobody wannu plant the corn ♪
♪ Everybody want to raid the barn ♪
♪ Who yuh a guh blame it on ♪
♪ When is a next man yuh a depend 'pon ♪
♪ Well yuh wrong ♪
♪ Nobody wannu plant the corn ♪
♪ Everybody want to raid the barn ♪
♪ Haffi sing yuh owna song ♪
♪ Can't compete with careless John ♪
♪ Well I've been up from ♪
early this morning ♪
♪ Never drink nuh tea, mi ♪
never eat nuh fry dumpling ♪
♪ Never see no one to ♪
strengthen me on mi journey ♪
♪ Now mi mek a change di ♪
whole a dem waan fi fren mi ♪
♪ Waan fi take it all, ♪
nuh mind ef mi stall ♪
♪ Dem nuh business if mi ♪
back 'gainst the wall ♪
♪ Dis yah living sometime mek mi ball ♪
♪ Seems like there aint no love afterall ♪
♪ Nobody wannu plant the corn ♪
♪ Everybody want to raid the barn ♪
♪ Who yuh a guh blame it on ♪
♪ When is a next man yuh a depend 'pon ♪
♪ Well yuh wrong ♪
♪ Nobody wannu plant the corn ♪
♪ Everybody want to raid the barn ♪
♪ Haffi sing yuh owna song ♪